[Music]
welcome everyone to another night Sky
News and the last one of the year
somehow as well I've worn my NASA
Christmas jumper for the occasion I'm
quite fond of it we'll start off by
looking at what's in the sky in the
coming month and then we'll go on to
space news stories of the past month so
if you've clicked on the video for
whatever's in the title the timestamps
are all in the description if you want
to skip straight to that bit a long way
of all the papers I mention it as well
but without further ado let's get into
this and start by looking so one of my
favorite things to do on Christmas time
is look for the International Space
Station in the sky and at least in the
UK anyway it's been doing many many
Passover's the past couple of days
now NASA haven't published the times yet
for Christmas Eve Christmas Day Boxing
Day but I will put the link in the
description so that you can see for your
specific town or city what time the ISS
will be passing over it's always a great
site to try and spot in the sky it's
incredibly bright you know as bright as
Venus so you're not gonna miss it and it
moves so quickly across the sky as well
you literally can't mistake it for
anything else but what I want to make
sure is that you know young viewers
especially do not confuse the
International Space Station with father
Christmas's sleigh going overhead
because it looks very convincing and you
know young people could very easily be
misled to believe that the International
Space Station is father Christmas so I
just want you all to be wary of that
before we go into Christmas Eve and a
probable International Space Station
Passover then on the 26th of December on
Boxing Day there's gonna be an annular
solar eclipse I'm not saying annual I'm
saying and you lar which essentially
means that we're not gonna have a full
total blackout of the Sun the moon will
pass in front of the Sun but will still
have a ring around the outside and
that's because the moon's orbit isn't
perfectly circular so sometimes it's
further away from us and sometimes it's
closer so the minute the moon is further
away from us and so it isn't big enough
in the sky to fully block the Sun and
this is gonna happen mostly across Asia
again
pulling in the description so you can
see if it's gonna be visible from
wherever you are gonna be on the 26th
then something to look out for in the
sort of betwixt mmus period so we're
gonna have a new moon on Christmas Eve
and Christmas day it's gonna be a very
very dark Christmas night but it does
mean that by the 2728 e39 we then have a
very young moon rising in our sky so a
very very thin Crescent just after
sunset if you look towards the west you
should be able to see it and also spot
Venus there at the same time so on the
27th the moon will just see below Venus
and then about the 28th that's what we
level with it and then by the 29th it
will have risen above Venus that sunset
it's just a really spectacular sight to
look out for in the sort of winter sky
then coming up next year which I kind of
can't believe that I could say that but
on the 4th of Jan 20 21 in its orbit we
call it its perihelion so from the Greek
peri meaning close and Helion meaning
Sun isn't like Helios the Sun God and
the reason I bring this up is just
because for people who haven't sort of
thought about it very carefully in a
while maybe people often think that our
summer should be when the earth is
closest to the Sun but of course January
4th at least for the northern hemisphere
is the middle of winter yes the southern
hemisphere is in summer but then of
course by the time we reach up Helion
which is the point at which earth is
farthest from the Sun it'll be southern
hemisphere winter and northern
hemisphere it's summer so what I should
make you realise is that well our
position in terms of the distance we are
from the Sun actually has no bearing on
our seasons at all what actually causes
the seasons is the earth axis tilt of
about 23 degrees which means that the
northern hemisphere is pointing towards
the Sun in June and the southern
hemisphere away from the Sun and then
six months later the southern hemisphere
points towards the Sun and the northern
hemisphere points away from the Sun and
that's what give us the huge variations
in temperature we get with our seasons
and not the sort of differences in
distance we get from the Sun on the
earth elliptical orbit alright that's
enough of creating our next looking up
it's time to come back to earth
a little bit of a bump and talk about
all of the recent results that have come
out from the past month much Hanabi
research personally I'm excited because
that's two different black hole results
to report and you know me I love black
holes the first result I want to talk
about it's about NGC 6240 so this is a
galaxy over hundreds of billions of
stars the NGC galaxies have a c-list
about 10,000 or so of the brightest
galaxies in our skies they're pretty
near to us as well because they're so
bright but this month in this galaxy
astronomers found three supermassive
black holes three NGC 6240 if you look
at the image it's very clearly what we
call a trainwreck merger it's the merger
of two galaxies and it absolutely
destroyed the shape of the galaxy you've
got the gravitational forces have torn
it apart and giving you these huge sort
of tails of material and giving you this
weird weird shape now the thing is when
two galaxies merge we also think the
supermassive black holes that are found
in the center of all galaxies have done
a video on that if you're curious as to
how we know that that those black holes
also merge as well and we know a fair
few galaxies that have what we call a
dual active nuclei and then instead of
just one
very very bright energetic actively
accreting supermassive black hole in the
center you've got two of them I like to
call them the double yolk is like a
double yolk egg but this study by
kolache and collaborators found three
supermassive black holes in the center
of NGC 6240 they're all over like 90
million times the mass of the Sun and
they're found within a region of about
3,000 light years which might sound a
lot but you could remember the galaxies
are like hundreds of thousands of light
years across so the space that these
black holes are found inside of is only
about 1% of the entire galaxy size so
they're crammed in there now the way
that these were found were to use this
sophisticated new instrument on the Very
Large Telescope the VLT in Chile that's
called
old news and it's incredibly detailed it
can get the same level of detail from
the ground as the Hubble Space Telescope
can get from space using this incredibly
advanced system where it uses lasers to
sort of determine what is the turbulence
through the air as the light is coming
to us and then actually adapt for that
and take it away from the light that
we're seeing it's so so clever that
instead of just taking an image and
having just sort of the amount of light
received in each pixel and every single
pixel it also splits that light into a
spectrum and then what you can see is
the emission and absorption from all the
different elements that are in that tiny
part of the galaxy but also you can see
the movement of stuff as well because if
stuff is moving in the part of the
galaxy different parts of the spectrum
will get slightly red shifted and blue
shifted with respect to each other so
you can pick out what we call the
kinematics of the galaxy so combining
that incredible super detail and then
also the kinematics of the galaxies and
all the stars and all the gas in it as
well they've been able to pick out where
these three supermassive black holes are
literally from the gas that's orbiting
around them and will eventually be a
creative sort of like you know gobbled
up by each of these black holes now okay
yeah three supermassive black holes in a
tiny space does sound cool by itself but
the reason that we care about this is
just a picture of understanding galaxy
evolution as a whole so we know that
mergers between galaxies happen because
we see them all across the universe but
when we think about how galaxies and the
black holes in the middle of them have
managed to grow so big over the lifetime
of the universe sometimes when you think
about it and you think about the most
massive black holes about sort of like
you know 10 billion times the mass of
the Sun you think even with sort of the
maximum amount of mergers it was most
likely to have had just from you know
being close to other galaxies and the
happenstance of another one passing by
and at being able to merge you often
kind of come up with the conclusion well
I don't think there was quite enough
time for it to have grown that big but
that's only assuming that you have two
galaxies merging at once if you can have
three galaxies
emerging at the same time so that you
end it was three supermassive black
holes then instead of doubling your mass
you can triple your mass was even more
exciting is that obviously these
supermassive black holes will also one
day merge and when they do they'll give
out gravitational waves now the current
detectors we have on earth so LIGO and
Virgo and detecting mergers of black
holes that are like 30 times the mass of
the Sun instead of you know 19 million
times the mass of the Sun because the
frequency that it's sensitive to is that
sort of frequency range it's not
sensitive to the frequency of
gravitational waves that are
supermassive black hole merger would
give out but there is a new instrument
coming called Lisa which is supposed to
be launched not next decade but the Dec
adapter so twenty thirty one I think and
it's gonna be a gravitational wave
detector that is in space which boggles
my mind like it's an engineering marvel
that they can do that and so Lisa should
be able to detect the mergers of
supermassive black holes and maybe one
day we'll find the merger of three of
them rather than just two but it's
unlikely that it's gonna be NGC 6240
because well these black holes are still
3,000 light years away and so we'll
probably take a couple of million years
to actually merge so I wouldn't hold
your breath with NGC 6240 so a year ago
in my night sky news for December 2018
we talked about how voyager 2 had just
left the solar system which is kind of
incredible you know having launched in
the 70s it's finally at the edge of the
solar system now it wasn't the first
synthetic object to leave the solar
system because voyager 1 left in august
2012 but it was the first with two
detectors on board that could actually
tell us that it had left the solar
system so to be sure you've left the
solar system you need two things you
needed a detector to detect the
radiation from the sun so the solar wind
particles the kind of particles that hit
into our atmosphere get funneled by
magnetic fields and produce the Northern
Lights you can kind of think of them as
like the sun's extended atmosphere then
you also needed sex as it can detect
cosmic ray particles from interstellar
space that come from supernova
explosions and that are really quite
harmful and dangerous radiation and so
you can think of both of those streams
of particles it's like a wind and where
those two winds of particles collide you
get an incredibly hot barrier of plasma
which is like a gas but the electrons in
all of the atoms are sort of free to
roam around and so what that then gives
you is this sort of boundary and it's a
boundary we called the helio pause
literally Helio Sun pause won't stop
right and I should also say we like this
plasma barrier of the heliopause because
it stops 70% of the super harmful
radiation of cosmic rays from
interstellar space from actually making
it into the solar system and so what
Voyager 2 was able to do was detect the
drop-off in solar wind particles and the
increase in cosmic ray particles as it
crossed the heliopause now Voyager 1
should have been able to do that but
it's detected - detects all the wind
particles wasn't working at the time and
so we only got the increase in cosmic
ray particles we didn't get the decrease
in solar radiation so we couldn't
actually do the science we wanted to on
the heliopause without both of those
things to detect what's going on Kathina
pause though it isn't you know some
incredibly thin barrier where all of a
sudden you take the switch Voyager 2
took about a day to traverse across this
sort of hot region of plasma where the
two winds collided and over the past
year the science team at NASA have been
analyzing the results and last month
published about five papers describing
what they'd found first of all the
temperature reached 31,000 centigrade or
Celsius which is like eighty nine
thousand Fahrenheit which is just kind
of a ridiculous temperature right for
just the edge of the solar system you
associate the edge of the solar system
with being very very cold but these are
the kind of temperatures you could reach
when these two streams of energetic
particles collide it suggests it's a
much more violent process than anyone
had ever considered also this layer of
plasma was thought to be a very smooth
homogeneous surface you know almost like
the surface of a bubble but in fact what
Voyager found
that it was kind of more like Swiss
cheese it was patchy there was holes
everywhere she was getting like spikes
of cosmic rays as it was passing through
all the patches in this heliopause and
now we think it's these patches that do
allow sort of like 30 percent of the
cosmic rays to actually make it into the
solar system and even sometimes land on
the detector of the image you're trying
to take using a telescope of a mountain
somewhere which is really annoying
because it sometimes wrecks your
observation and gets in the way but at
the same time you're also aware that
you've detected like a particle from
interstellar space from some supernova
millions of years ago and there was
inconvenient as it is next time I think
that happened and I'm using a telescope
all I'm gonna be thinking of is like
Swiss cheese heliopause let that one
through damn it so the next result I
want to talk about is a really cool
result but it was one that was taken by
the media and over sensationalized so
much to the point of being wrong so
those who did see it may have seen a
headline that said the 70 solar mass
black hole that shouldn't exist which is
just plain false and a claim that the
paper never actually made so this was a
paper by Lou and collaborators and
essentially what they found was a black
hole in a binary system with a very
large star and they found it essentially
by observing the motion of That star
over a couple of years and seeing that
the only way you could explain that
motion was if it was orbiting around
something very massive and using some
nice orbital mechanics you find out that
that thing is 68 times the mass of the
Sun because we actually can't see it and
it's dark the only thing it can be is a
black hole which is really cool but why
did it get so much attention well this
is the biggest stellar-mass black hole I
sort of a similar mass Rangers stars
that we've ever found direct evidence
for know how careful I was with the
wording there because we've clearly
found more massive black holes before
because we've got supermassive black
holes that are tens of thousands to
millions to billions
times the mass and the Sun and also
we've detected gravitational waves from
the mergers of two black holes that are
round about 30 to 40 times the mass of
the Sun meaning that the end product you
get is around about 60 to 80 times the
mass of the Sun so the black hole
they've detected here at 68 times the
mass the Sun it's sort of right in the
middle of that but it's one we've
directly observed not just gravitational
waves that we've detected and said well
the product must be that mass all the
black holes you've detected directly
before have been found using x-rays they
weave what's called an x-ray binary so
the material that spiraling around the
black hole that it's sort of accreting
heats up to incredible incredible
temperatures and gives off x-rays and
usually they're found in a binary system
with another star because the black hole
is pulling material off the other star
now those black holes we found around 20
to 30 times the mass of the Sun so this
one that they found is a little
different being 70 times the mass of the
Sun but it's not so different as to call
for these headlines so where did these
come from so if you consider like black
hole formation 101 you have a star a
very massive one usually that's maybe
something like a hundred or so times the
mass of the Sun that's coming to the end
of its life because it's running out of
hydrogen to burn into helium or helium
to burn into the heavier and heavier
elements and what happens is that once
there's no energy pushing outwards from
those nuclear reactions gravity
basically collapses the whole thing
inwards but what does happen is that
most of the outer layers of the star are
then thrown back out again they rebound
and they're thrown back out in a big
sort of what we call a supernova
explosion but then the central region of
the star still does collapse down so the
biggest black hole you can kind of form
in that way is about 20 or so times the
mass of the Sun depending on sort of
what generation your star is like how
many more heavier elements it does have
in it you can get sort of different
amounts but generally it's about 20
times the mass of the Sun so this is
what we think forms these x-ray binaries
because there's just two stars and one
of them goes supernova collapses down
into a black hole and so
to accrete matter off the other one and
we're seeing sort of the fresh black
hole that's just formed but we know
that's not the only way that you can
make or grow a black hole you can merge
two black holes together and we know
that that happens because you detected
gravitational waves from such a thing
happening so if we think about how
something 68 times the mass per ton
could have formed well maybe it wasn't a
binary system to start with what if it
was three stars orbiting each other or
four or five or even six might sound a
little bit crazy but actually only 50%
of stars are single stars like our Sun
at least sort of in our solar
neighborhood anyway of the three
thousand star systems nearest sewers in
the source system fifty percent sure are
these single stars like the Sun but then
35 percent are binaries ten percent our
tertiary systems and even like three
percent are four stars orbiting each
other and then the rest us even five or
six stars orbiting each other so it's
not an unlikely scenario to get more
than one star maybe going supernova and
collapsing into a black hole
especially if maybe three or four of
them are very massive stars and you can
see how something sixty eight times the
mass the Sun might have ended up growing
that big and ending up looking like it
was just in a binary system also back in
2015 the Hubble Space Telescope caught a
star completely disappearing entirely
one day it was there and the next it
just wasn't no supernova remnant nothing
to say that it exploded absolutely
nothing it just completely collapsed
down into being a black hole this was
the star n6 946 bh1 it was a 25 times
the mass of the Sun star that
essentially had tried to take the next
step up from sort of burning hydrogen
into helium and and taking this step
from going okay helium into carbon but
something had gone a little bit wrong
the pressures and densities weren't
quite right to make that step up and so
could not counteract all of a sudden the
force of gravity pulling everything in
words into a black hole
not only could you imagine a scenario
where the system started off as maybe a
tertiary or even four stars in a system
I mean five six whatever and maybe they
all collapsed down in a normal supernova
to a black hole or maybe some of them
directly collapsed into a black hole so
it's not that it shouldn't exist at all
in fact it's actually quite likely that
it would exist it's just that we've
never seen anything like that before but
there was nothing to say that it
shouldn't happen because we've observed
all of those things individually but
never all in the same place and that is
what makes it exciting for me so that's
it for space news for December and for
2019 and for this decade as well all
that's left for me to say is to have a
very Merry Christmas and a Happy New
Year I will be saying he a much-needed
break from both YouTube and research
over Christmas and I'll be out for a
couple of weeks but I will be back in
January 2020 with more videos and news
like this one I personally are
incredibly excited for what 2020 and in
fact just the 20s as a decade as a whole
have in store hopefully they will see
the launch of the James Webb Space
Telescope and more and more exciting
discoveries and new results in research
who knows when the 2020s will takers or
ever it does I will be here explaining
it all for you guys my lovely
subscribers so until then I will see you
guys in the next decade
now the way that these were found was to
use the sophistic now the way that these
were found were to use this sophistic
sophisticated come on and it's gonna be
a gravitational wave detector detector
of course muscles coming and becky's get
in fact please but defending me over